---
date: 2017-08-22
title: "On Suicide #1"
---

*First of all, this should in no way urge you to actually
commit suicide. It's a sensitive topic and I don't want people
to believe in what I am saying (quite the opposite rather).
I want to explore the multitude of views and opinions about
living a better life and and what better way to learn about life than
to study death itself.*

What happens after you kill an animal? It's gone. It vanishes.
There's no way to know what actually happened. Maybe it was
an alien playing Goat simulator, maybe all of this is just a
dream and we didn't really kill anyone. There could be lots
of excuses which can be made to what happens after death, but
none of them should matter to us as one thing stands clear,
whatever it is, it is the end and anything from the point of
death does not matter.

It the exact same reason why anything before your birth also
does not matter. It's "time" you can not go back to. It's
value is not attainable nor measurable by you.

Now humans are creatures of greed. You can either be greedy to
acquire more pleasure, or greedy to reduce your sufferings. On
your quest to satiate the pleasures you may want to maximize
your life span, because everything after death does not
matter.

But for the greed (or rather the struggle) to reduce
sufferings, there aren't a lot of things which can be done.
Majority of the world *isn't* in your control, you can not
see any light at the end of the tunnel. Maybe others can,
maybe they get out. But do you really want to be suffering
constantly or rather choose the unknown for because after
death you do not exist and nothing matters.

The actions of suicide doesn't affect you, since there no
longer exists a"you". It's a greedy decision (and hence Kant
is against committing suicide, because you don't want the
entire world to be doing that thing), but it's not something
thing to be deemed as an evil sin in itself.

> Can you no longer see a road to freedom? It's right in front
> of you. You need only turn over your wrists. -Seneca

*(PS: I may not make sense, and all of this might be utter crap
and I'm happy to understand and have a hearty discussion on it! ^_^)*
*I'll be writing more about this when I visit some other view
points in detail*
