---
layout: post
title:  "On Money"
date:   2020-02-22

---

Money, as you know drives our daily lives and is a main source of exchange for
everything we need. It is almost as old as the human civilisation and has taken
various forms throughout the human history, from metals to cowry shells to
paper based system.


Have you ever wondered why money holds such a significant value in our lives
and why is it so successful in driving our global economy?  Let us go back to
the stone-age era.  Humans of that era were hunters. There was no money. Each
hunter band hunted, gathered almost anything that was required from food to
medicine, from clothes to shelter. Every band member had some specialised skill
which they use to exchange in favour of goods and supplies they needed.


For example: if one band required meat, they would ask another band in exchange
for a free medical assistance. Nothing changed even during the agricultural
revolution. A farmer, wanting to take a free medical assistance, would go to a
local village specialised in medicine and return a sack of rice for that
favour. This is what we called the “Barter System”.


An economy of favours and obligations doesn’t work when a large of group of
strangers try to cooperate. It’s only effective when you are exchanging a
limited range of products. In order to understand the limitations of the
barter, let’s take an example.


Let’s say you own a strawberry farm and work very hard that your shoes start to
wear out. You take a ride to a local shoemaker and ask for a shoe in exchange
for the strawberries that you just grew in your orchard. Shoemaker hesitates
and says he doesn’t like strawberries but wants a divorce. True, that you could
find a lawyer who likes strawberries and sign a three way deal. But what if the
lawyer has a full stock of strawberries and needs medical assistance.


Also, if there are numerous exchange commodities in the market, people will
have to juggle through various exchange rates. For example a shoemaker would
have to check how many strawberries is one shoe worth in the market?  Some of
the societies during that era tried to solve these problems by establishing
“Central Barter System” that collected products from specialised growers and
distributed them to those who needed them. Most famous one was in Soviet Union
and it failed miserably.


Their thought process was ‘Everyone would work according to their abilities and
receive what they need’ which turned out to be “Everyone would work as little
as they can and receive as much as they could grab”. This is the reason why
most of the ancient societies found an easy way to connect large groups of
experts and they developed “Money”.


Money has been created many times in many places from coins, metals to cowry
shells. Human history’s first known money was “Sumerian Barley Money” in Sumer
around 3000 BC. It was simply barley. A fixed amount of barley was exchanged in
return for other goods and services. This method was not effective as it is
very difficult to store and transport barley. Just imagine ordering one pizza
in exchange for 20 sacks of barley. That would be a nightmare!


You would probably have to use a truck every time you venture out to search for
goods and services. Later in the modern era, coins and metals were exchanged,
but that too was not feasible, in terms of transport, when carried in large
amounts. This is the reason why most of the money today, is on the computer
servers in the form of digital money. Sum of total money in the world is $60
trillion, yet less than 10% of it is the form of bank notes and coins.


You see, trust is a raw material from which all types of money is minted.
Dollars, rupees, pounds etc., they only hold value in our imagination. Their
worth is not encoded in the chemical structure, colour, material or its shape.
What I mean to say is that money is a psychological construct. For thousands of
years, philosophers, thinkers have besmirched money and have called it the
‘root of all evil’. But money is the peak of human tolerance. It is open minded
than any other language, beliefs or habits. It is the only trust system that
does not discriminate between age, race, sex or religion. Thanks to money, that
people who are unknown to each other and don’t trust each other can
nevertheless co-operate effectively.
